{\rtf1\ansi\deff0\nouicompat{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Helvetica;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\fnil\fcharset1 Segoe UI Symbol;}{\f3\fnil Helvetica;}{\f4\fnil\fcharset0 Helvetica Neue;}{\f5\fnil Helvetica Neue;}{\f6\fnil\fcharset128 Helvetica Neue;}{\f7\fnil\fcharset0 MS Mincho;}{\f8\fnil\fcharset2 Symbol;}}
{\colortbl ;\red0\green0\blue0;\red255\green66\blue161;\red114\green252\blue233;\red0\green0\blue255;\red255\green240\blue86;\red228\green175\blue10;\red237\green34\blue11;}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.19041}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sl240\slmult1\cf1\highlight2\f0\fs40\lang17 SEE HIGHTLIGHT IN RED (DROUGHT AND WATER REDUCTION-ADD TO INTRO RESEARCH AND REASON TO CHOOSE EDUCATION?WATER SAVING NOW)\par
\par
\highlight3\fs24 National Water Initiative (NWI) \par
{\cf0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.agriculture.gov.au/water/policy/nwi }}{\fldrslt{https://www.agriculture.gov.au/water/policy/nwi\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs24\par
\highlight0 - \b\caps INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT on a national water initiative\b0\caps0 : {\ul{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/sitecollectiondocuments/water/Intergovernmental-Agreement-on-a-national-water-initiative.pdf"}}{\fldrslt{https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/sitecollectiondocuments/water/Intergovernmental-A}}}}{\ul\f0\fs24{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/sitecollectiondocuments/water/Intergovernmental-Agreement-on-a-national-water-initiative.pdf"}}{\fldrslt{greement-on-a-national-water-initiative.pdf}}}}\ulnone\f0\fs24\par
- \b\caps 2013 Water Planning report card (National Water Commission)\b0\caps0 : {\cf0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/sitecollectiondocuments/water/2013-national-water-planning-report-card.pdf }}{\fldrslt{https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/sitecollectiondocuments/water/2013-national-water-planning-report-card.pdf\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs24\par
\b\f1 - NWI Policy Guidelines for Water Planning and Management\par
{\cf0\b0\f0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.agriculture.gov.au/water/policy/nwi/guidelines-water }}{\fldrslt{https://www.agriculture.gov.au/water/policy/nwi/guidelines-water\ul0\cf0}}}}\b0\f0\fs24\par
See case studies/ \par
\b - \caps Risk assessment module\caps0 : {\ul\b0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/sitecollectiondocuments/water/risk-module.pdf"}}{\fldrslt{https://www.agriculture.go}}}}{\ul\b0\f0\fs24{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/sitecollectiondocuments/water/risk-module.pdf"}}{\fldrslt{v.au/sites/default/files/sitecollectiondocuments/water/risk-module.pdf}}}}\ulnone\b\f0\fs24\par
- NATIONAL WATER REFORM: {\cf0\b0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.pc.gov.au/inquiries/completed/water-reform-2020#report }}{\fldrslt{https://www.pc.gov.au/inquiries/completed/water-reform-2020#report\ul0\cf0}}}}\b0\f0\fs24   \par
\highlight3\par
\par
Australian Water Assc. (May 2017)\par
{\ul{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.awa.asn.au/"}}{\fldrslt{www.awa.asn.au}}}}\f0\fs24\par
\highlight5 Emerging challenges and opportunities to secure our water future: {\ul{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5abb0c805b409b8d0da49ce5/t/5e2fc6a239c8eb7ff9e116d8/1580189472990/Water+Security+Challenge+Background"}}{\fldrslt{https://static1.squarespace.com/stati}}}}{\ul\f0\fs24{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5abb0c805b409b8d0da49ce5/t/5e2fc6a239c8eb7ff9e116d8/1580189472990/Water+Security+Challenge+Background"}}{\fldrslt{c/5abb0c805b409b8d0da49ce5/t/5e2fc6a239c8eb7ff9e116d8/1580189472990/Water+Security+Challenge+Background}}}}\ulnone\f0\fs24\par
\highlight3\par
\highlight0 National Plan for Water Security (2006): Outstanding issues include addressing:\par
\b mining and indigenous water, \b0\par
\highlight5\b urban water\highlight0 , \b0 and \par
achieving nationally consistent \b water pricing and regulation.\b0\par
\highlight3\par
\highlight0 Water security offers opportunities: for cooperation, collaboration, and for addressing challenges in a multi-disciplinary and cross-sectoral way in order to \b reduce risks for potential conflicts and manage continued sustainable development and growth.\b0\par
\b\par
\b0 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). SDG6 commits all countries by 2030 to \b\ldblquote achieve universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water for all\rdblquote .\b0\par
\b FRAMEWORK_NATIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL\b0\par
\b\tab The frameworks includ\b0 e:\par
\tab\tab\f2\u9687?\f0\lang1033  The National Water Initiative 2004\par
\lang17\tab\tab\f2\u9687?\f0\lang1033  The National Plan for Water Security - 2006\par
\lang17\tab\tab\f2\u9687?\f0\lang1033  United Nations Water Security Framework\par
\lang17\tab\tab\f2\u9687?\f0\lang1033  European Union Water Framework\par
\lang17\tab\tab\f2\u9687?\f0\lang1033  Water Governance in OECD Countries - A Multi-Level Approach 2011\par
\lang17\tab\tab\f2\u9687?\f0\lang1033  High Level Panel on Water Plan of Action - 2016 \par
\lang17\tab\b The scorecards include:\par
\b0\tab\tab\f2\u9687?\f0\lang1033  National Water Accounts \f3\endash\f0  Australian Bureau of Meteorology\par
\lang17\tab\tab\f2\u9687?\f0\lang1033  Water in Australia - Australian Bureau of Meteorology 2014-15\par
\lang17\tab\tab\f2\u9687?\f0\lang1033  State of the Environment Report - Australian Government 2016\par
\lang17\tab\tab\f2\u9687?\f0\lang1033  Australian National Outlook \f3\endash\f0  CSIRO 2015\par
\lang17\tab\tab\f2\u9687?\f0\lang1033  Asian Development Bank \f3\endash\f0  Asian Water Development Outlook 2016\par
\b\lang17\par
5. DEFINITION OF WATER SECURITY\par
\b0 The United Nations define Water security as the capacity of a population to \tab safeguard sustainable access to adequate quantities of \b acceptable quality water \tab for sustaining livelihoods, human well-being, and socio-economic \tab\tab\tab development,\b0  for ensuring protection a\b gainst water-borne pollution and water- \tab related disasters, \b0 and for preserving ecosystems in a climate of peace and political stability.\par
This definition implies \highlight5 that water is managed sustainably throughout the water \tab\tab cycle\highlight0  and is done so through an inter-disciplinary focus, so that it contributes to \tab\tab socio-economic development and reinforces societal resilience to environmental \tab\tab impacts and water-borne diseases without compromising the present and future \tab\tab health of populations and ecosystems.\par
\par
\tab\b IN AUSTRALIA: \par
\b0 delivers a vital input to businesses across the industrial, agricultural, and services sectors. \par
Also playing an increasing role in enhancing the liveability of our urban and rural communities.\par
Internationally Australia is a recognised leader in many aspects of water reform, including water allocation and scarcity management.\par
The Productivity Commission now undertaking a review of National Water Initiative and the need for future water reform, including:\par
water resource management, \par
\highlight5 urban water reform, \par
\highlight0 rural water reform and water planning. \par
A central focus of the review is to drive productivity and unlock economic growth from water, including for regional economies.\par
\par
\b\tab AUSTRALIAN EXAMPLES:\par
\b0\tab There are numerous examples of State governments taking responsibility for water \tab\tab planning within their regions, with several plans recently produced including;\par
Queensland - Water for life - South East Queensland\rquote s Water Security Program - 2016-2046\par
\highlight5 New South Wales \f3\endash\f0  2017 Metropolitan Water. Plan - Water for a Liveable, Growing and Resilient Greater Sydney\par
New South Wales \f3\endash\f0  various Regional Water Resourcing Plans (2016 \f3\endash\f0  2017)\par
\highlight0 Victoria \f3\endash\f0  Water for Victoria 2016\par
Western Australia \f3\endash\f0  Water for Growth \f3\endash\f0  Water. Supply and Demand Outlook to 2050 \f3\endash\f0  2016\par
Australian Capital Territory \f3\endash\f0  Water Strategy - Striking the Balance - 2014-44\par
Northern Territory - \lquote Our Water Future Discussion Paper: A Conversation with Territories\rquote  \f3\endash\f0  2015\par
BUT \'85.there is no nationally harmonised or consistent approach to regulating water security [\'85] One of the strongest lessons from the Millieneum Drought was the need for long term and integrated planning for both investment in assets and community engagemenT PP. 4\par
\par
\tab\b The [AUSTRALIAN WATER] Association\b0  raising levels of awareness of water \tab\tab\tab security issues with government & community \'85\b key discussion items \b0 (pp.5):\par
\fs18 Survey: water security for all Australians was their number one priority.\par
With the demise of both Australian Government\rquote s Standing Council on Environment and Water, and the National Water Commission\b , there is no single federal structure for the Commonwealth and the States and Territories to drive water security initiatives\b0 . Do we need one?\par
\ldblquote International Decade (2018\f3\endash\f0  2028) for Action \f3\endash\f0  Water for Sustainable Development\rdblquote  to help put a greater focus on water during the next ten years. This is on top of the adoption of the sustainable development goals, to which Australia has signed up to and the establishment a high- level implementation panel of national heads of government including our Prime Minister.\par
In December 2016, the Australian Government signed an agreement with New South Wales, Western Australia, Tasmania, the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory to \ldblquote ..focus on more efficiently and sustainably securing urban water services.\rquote  and to \ldblquote ..promote improved governance, better economic regulation and a better understanding of where competition can be deployed..\rdblquote\par
The Productivity Commission has commenced an inquiry that will assess progress in achieving the objectives and outcomes of the National Water Initiative (NWI) and the need for any future reform.\par
There is no clear and agreed national framework for water security in Australia. What should be our national security objectives?\par
Australia faces significant environmental and economic impacts from evolving changes including\b  climate change, population growth, agriculture, mining, industry and the growth of our coastal communities.\b0\par
The Productivity Commission has commenced an inquiry that will assess progress in achieving the objectives and outcomes of the National Water Initiative (NWI) and the need for any future reform.\par
The United Nations, European Union, United States and Asian Development Bank all have significant framework / scorecard approaches to planning and managing water security that warrant consideration in Australia. Would such a national framework deliver greater water security?\par
Under the Australian Constitution the States are responsible for water management. However, there are significant and proven benefits from nationally coordinated water reforms. The Australian water sector invested many billions of dollars in delivering reforms under the National Competition Policy and NWI including in R&D, technological and managerial innovation. Are we capturing the legacy of this work by ensuring that the lessons and innovations of the past are shared nationally and internationally?\par
\par
\fs24 6. \b\caps Influencing Factors for Water security \highlight5 IMPORTANT\highlight0\b0\caps0\par
\ul\b\fs20 Risks include:\par

\pard{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf8\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-164\li524\sl240\slmult1\ulnone\b0 the failure to foresight water security challenges and develop mechanisms to allocate water amongst competing users in an economically efficient manner\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}Failing to heed the lessons of Millennium Drought by not taking long term water security out of short term budget cycles\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}\highlight5\b Failing to forecast and plan for future water supply/ demand balance with expected extremes of climatic conditions (drought and flood) HACKATON: HOW TO LINK!!!\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}\highlight0\b0 The need to address \b indigenous water rights\b0\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}\highlight5\b Population growth and urban sprawl leading to higher demand and increasing pollution - I.E. COMUNITY ENGAGEMNT IN MEASURING CONSUMPTION (ENERGY & WATER) & APPS TO FOLLOW UP YOUR PERFORMANCE-THE GOOD CITIZEN\'85.\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}\highlight0\b0 Expanding demand for water in\highlight5\b  creating livable communities (in both urban and rural areas) - HOW WATER CAN INCREASE LIVEABILITY, REDUCE COMSUMPTION AND POLLUTION, ETC, I.E. Water Sensitive design\'85 How to propose these strategies in Hackaton in 1 Day work?\highlight0\b0\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}Changes in managing water quality from new supply sources and technologies;\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}\highlight5\b Failing to integrate planning processes across the water cycle and urban planning- \caps water separation (black, grey and rain water) /  WATER PURIFICATION PRIOR TO GO TO BASINS (WATER SENSITIVE DESIGN) / IDEA OF \lquote LIVING WITH WATER\rquote\caps0\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}\highlight0\b0 Increasing need for aligning institutions and regulatory frameworks to maximise efficiency\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab} Not developing alternative water sources to provide enhanced supply resilience\highlight5  ??? DON\rquote T UNDERSTAND\highlight0\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}Failing to obtain long-term community engagement in tackling water security challenges; \highlight5 FUNDAMENTAL COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT, I.E. CAN AN APP OR A PROGRAM TO COMPITE AS DE THE MOST SUSTAINABLE NEIGHBOUR OR NEIGHBOURHOOD BE IMPLEMENTED?\highlight0\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}\highlight5 Addressing the unique water security challenges around our coastlines\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}\b The failure of environmental securit\b0 y CLIMATE CHANGE (SEA LEVEL RISE AND IMPACT IN POLLUTION OF WATER IN HUNTER RIVER AND VICEVERSA -LOW LAND HIGHLY CONTAMINATED BY HEAVY METAL THE RIVER CONTAIN-); FLOODS (STRATEGIES TO INTEGRATE URBAN LIVEABILITY AND DESIGN, POLLUTION REDUCTION AND SECURITY (FLOODS ETC).\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}\highlight0\par

\pard\li1440\sl240\slmult1\ul\b Opportunities include:\par

\pard{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf8\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-164\li524\sl240\slmult1\ulnone\b0 Introducing new innovations and technology including \highlight5\b\lquote smart water cities\rquote  and big data to drive greater efficiencies; ANDY & MATT & TRAVIS?\highlight0\b0\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}Addressing the water challenge of the development of the north (AND WHAT HAPPEN WITH MINNING THAT 1) POLUTE WATER IN UPPER HUNTER; 2) CONSUME MASSIVE AMOUNT OF FRESH WATER TAHT THEN PUT BACK INTO THE WATER SYSTEM AS POLLUTED WATER).\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}Improved price regulation of water security\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}Ensuring institutional arrangements that \highlight5\b enable water / energy / food nexus outcomes WHAT IF HACKATON IS ABOUT DOING THIS IN A HOUSE & (EVENTUALLY) NEIGHBOURHOOD LAB.\highlight0\b0\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}Greater investment in water R&D to build new innovations and to fill knowledge gaps across the industry and community; \highlight5\b PARTICIPTATORY DESIGN AND COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT\highlight0\b0\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}Greater transparency in policy decisions, governance, and market regulation;\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}New sources of finance to underwrite our future water infrastructure needs\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab} \highlight5\b Increased investment in climate resilient water assets from both the public and private sectors; MUST BE A PLANNIG STRTAEGYE-IT\rquote S REQUIRE A MASTER PLAN IN LONG TERM WITH DIFFERENT SCENARIOS AND PREDICTIONS.\highlight0\b0\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}\highlight5\b Recognition of the nexus between water and energy management that can deliver new efficiencies. AGAIN TEH IDEA OF APPLYING IN A PROTOTYPE ON HOUSING SCALE WHERE WATER AND ENERGY PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION ARE CENTRALISED AND GREATE A CIRCULAR ECONOMY SYSTEMS\'85 HOW IS THAT IMPACTING TO ENERGY PROVIDERS AND HUNTER WATER AND WHETHER THEY WILL FIGHT. AGAINS IS ANOTHER. POINT!\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}\highlight0\b0  I\b mproved understanding of the value of water to our communities including recognition and valuation of externalities (social, environmental, commercial, tourism etc)\b0\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}\b Recognising the importance of environmental sustainability to the economic security and society wellbeing. BOTH COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT, URBAN LIVEABILITY AND PLANNING (I.E. DESIGN OF PUBLIC SPACE TO SOLVE 1. WATER POLLUTION; 2. RISK (CLIMATE CHANGE, FLOOD, FLAS); 3. LEASURE & WATER\par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\par
To inform our analysis the following questions need to be considered:\par

\pard{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf8\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-164\li524\sl240\slmult1\b0 To what extent has nationally coordinated water reform enabled water security to support Australia\rquote s economic development, our communities and our environment?\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}What does the industry consider to be enduring principles to guide future water security in Australia?\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}W\ul\b hat are the other emerging risks and opportunities that need to be considered that are not covered in this discussion paper?\ulnone\b0\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}What are barriers to implementing water reforms to achieve water security and how can they be overcome?\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab} Are there more efficient or\highlight5\b  effective ways, including industry and private sector participation, of \highlight0\b0 achieving increased water security outcomes. \b YES, ACTIVE ROL OF SOCIETY AND INDUSTRY IN MEASURING THEIR BOTH PRODUCTION AND COMSUMPTION\'85 AGAIN DEFINE A PROTOTYPE FOR BOTH!\b0\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}\highlight5\b Are there opportunities to better manage the interface of water policy with other policy realms such as energy and resources, agriculture, and urban planning? THIS IS PROBABLY THE. QUESTION THEY. WOULD MAKE IN THE HACKATON\par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\highlight0\b0\par
\b\caps\fs24\par
7. Water security in the australian context\par
\b0\caps0 In providing water security Australia needs to provide water for the competing demands of \ul\b drinking water, agriculture and industry, water for livable communities, and water for the environment.\ulnone\b0 The Association advocates that water security in Australia needs:\par
\tab\f2\u9687?\f0\lang1033  water fit for purpose: Water supplies that are safe and are fit for use\par
\lang17\tab\f2\u9687?\highlight5\f0\lang1033  water efficiency: Supporting water that is managed efficiently, delivering maximum \tab environmental and social benefit at least cost\highlight0\par
\lang17\tab\f2\u9687?\f0\lang1033  water performance: Effective measurement and reporting on water security to our \tab\tab community\par
\lang17\tab\ul\f2\u9687?\b\f0\lang1033  water sustainability: Supporting water that is managed within sustainable \tab\tab limits, delivering whole of water cycle outcomes\ulnone\b0\par
\lang17\tab\f2\u9687?\f0\lang1033  water reliability: Supporting water supplies that are secure, resilient and deliver \tab\tab\tab customer value.\par
\lang17\par
In formulating a national framework to provide water security the following guiding principles may be appropriate:\par
\tab\f2\u9687?\f0\lang1033  \highlight5\b resilience\f3\emdash\f0 having sufficient capacity to adapt to external shocks to the \tab\tab\tab system as \tab a whole, such as those associated with the impacts of climate \tab\tab\tab change\highlight0 . THIS POINT REQUIRES A MULTI-AGENT, MULTI-DISCIPLINY, MULTI-\tab\tab SCALE APPROACH INN SHORT (EMERGENCY), MEDIUM (PLANNING&MULTI-\tab\tab LEVEL STRATEGIES) AND LARGE (IMPLEMENTATION &EXECUTION)\b0\par
\lang17\tab\f2\u9687?\f0\lang1033  flexibility\f3\emdash\f0 being able to identify and respond to changing and diverse customer \tab\tab and community needs in a smooth, timely and efficient manner.\par
\lang17\tab\f2\u9687?\f0\lang1033  efficiency\f3\emdash\f0 responding to incentives to deliver maximum overall benefit at the \tab\tab\tab least overall cost.\par
\lang17\tab\f2\u9687?\f0\lang1033  transparency\f3\emdash\f0 building and maintaining a \highlight5\b proactive culture of complete \tab\tab\tab openness to stakeholders and the public about performance and decision \tab\tab\tab making.\par
\highlight0\b0\lang17\tab\f2\u9687?\f0\lang1033  accountability\f3\emdash\b\f0 being held responsible for clearly defined objectives and \tab\tab\tab provided with rewards for good performance and sanctions for poor \tab\tab\tab\tab performance.\b0\par
\lang17\tab\f2\u9687?\b\f0\lang1033  Customer-focus\f3\emdash\f0 not simply providing least-cost services, but \tab\tab\tab\tab understanding and meeting the diverse needs of all customers in \tab\tab\tab\tab differentiated ways and providing value for money. \b0\caps AGAIN COMMUNITY \tab\tab\tab ENGAGEMENT THROUGH a program that connect. Consumption, \tab\tab\tab sustainability and public engagement/INCENNGTIVES (saving \tab\tab\tab money, getting (i.e Tax) incentives for good practices) \par
\lang17\par
\b 8. Water security for urban Towns and cities\par
\b0\caps0 In the past 10 years the Australian urban water sector has weathered new extremes in drought and flood and emerged far different to its predecessor. The provision of safe, secure, efficient and sustainable water and waste water services remain the primary drivers for urban water reform. \par
\highlight5 Many have identified the need for the urban water sector to focus on customers, ensure efficient regulatory arrangements, clarify the role of the urban sector in delivering on liveability outcomes and implement further change around institutional arrangements and policy settings to enable competitive neutrality. \caps This is all and nothing-the how?!\caps0\par
\highlight0 many of the debates and controversies after the millennium drought investments, were a result of the lack of long term planning by many governments to prepare for such a drought, which could recur at any time, possibly for even longer periods.\par
Delivering water services across Australia\rquote s vast regional, remote and very remote areas presents its own range of complex economic, demographic and geographic challenges. The diversity of circumstances \f3\endash\f0  ranging from larger, sometimes fast growing regional centres, to the most remote indigenous communities \f3\endash\f0  means that there is no \lquote one size fits all\rquote  approach to addressing these issues.\par
In some regional areas, the provision of appropriate water supply solutions will always depend on ongoing economic cross-subsidies and tailored community participation strategies. The Association expects, nevertheless, that nationally applicable reforms across the urban water sector will lead to efficiency gains in the regional water sector. To the extent that some of the problems confronting these utilities are driven by the sub-optimal operating scale of businesses, there is a role for structural reform.\par
summary: The provision of safe, secure, efficient and sustainable water and waste water services remain the primary drivers for urban water reform. However, the challenges and opportunities to improve nationally significant social, economic and environmental outcomes from urban water have evolved considerably. The focus now is on creating the institutional, regulatory and market conditions favourable for the integration of urban water services with the objectives for productive and liveable cities.\par
\caps\par
9. rural Water security\par
\caps0 The rural water reforms delivered under the NWI was built on a history of Australian water reform, including the 1994 COAG Water Reform Framework.\par
The rural water reforms delivered over the past decade saw some fundamental shifts in water management, driven as part of Australia\rquote s wider competition policy reform agenda, recognising the continuing national imperative of increasing the productivity and efficiency of Australia\rquote s water use and the need to ensure the health of river and groundwater systems.\par
\caps\par
\par
\b 10. so where now?\par
\b0\caps0 With the review of the National Water Initiative currently underway and 2018 having been earmarked by the United Nations as the start of the decade of water, we need to set a vision for the future.\par
The outcomes from this process will be a call on the Commonwealth and State Governments to:\par
\f2\u9687?\f0\lang1033  Make a clear \ldblquote National Statement on Water Security for Australia - 2030\rdblquote\par
\f2\lang17\u9687?\f0\lang1033  Consider in that statement the issues and feedback from this industry workshop\par
\f2\lang17\u9687?\f0\lang1033  Make a commitment to increase our water foresight ability and build stronger monitoring of our water security\par
\f2\lang17\u9687?\f0\lang1033  Commit funds to support the development of a refreshed 2030 water reform agenda\par
\lang17 What do you want water security to look like in Australia in 2030?\par
\par
I\highlight5 PL_TWO FOCUS:\par
SMALL SCALE (HOUSING) TO MONITORISE CONSUMPTION AND PRODUCTION (ENERGY & WATER)\par
URBAN SCALE THINKING IN SEPARATIVE WATER SERVICES AND THE REUSE OF WAE=TER (REDUCE/REUSE/RECYCLE)\par
\highlight0\par
\f3\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\f0\par
\highlight2 WATER\par
\highlight5\par
\b IMPORTANT\par
\highlight3 AUSTRALIAN WATER ASSOCIATION / Publications and Information\par
{\ul\b0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.awa.asn.au/AWA_MBRR/Publications/AWA_MBRR/Publications/Publications_and_Information.aspx"}}{\fldrslt{https://www.awa.asn.au/AWA_MBRR/Publications/AWA_MBRR/Publications/Publications_and}}}}{\ul\b0\f0\fs24{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.awa.asn.au/AWA_MBRR/Publications/AWA_MBRR/Publications/Publications_and_Information.aspx"}}{\fldrslt{_Information.aspx}}}}\ulnone\b\f0\fs24\par
\par
Water. E-journal:\par
{\cf0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.awa.asn.au/AWA_MBRR/Publications/AWA_Water_e-journal.aspx }}{\fldrslt{https://www.awa.asn.au/AWA_MBRR/Publications/AWA_Water_e-journal.aspx\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs24\par
\par
Online document library\par
{\cf0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://www.awa.asn.au/AWA_MBRR/Publications/Online_Document_Library/AWA_MBRR/Journal%20search.aspx }}{\fldrslt{http://www.awa.asn.au/AWA_MBRR/Publications/Online_Document_Library/AWA_MBRR/Journal%20search.aspx\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs24\par
\highlight0\f3\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\f0\par
\highlight5\par
\highlight3 INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT ON A NATIONAL WATER INITIATIVE\par
\b0 Between the Commonwealth of Australia and the Governments of New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, South Australia, the Australian Capital Territory\par
and the Northern Territory\par
{\cf0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/sitecollectiondocuments/water/Intergovernmental-Agreement-on-a-national-water-initiative.pdf }}{\fldrslt{https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/sitecollectiondocuments/water/Intergovernmental-Agreement-on-a-national-water-initiative.pdf\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs24\par
\highlight0\par
\f3\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\f0\par
\highlight3\par
\ul\b National Water Commission. The National Water Planning Report Card 2013\par
{\cf0\ulnone{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/sitecollectiondocuments/water/2013-national-water-planning-report-card.pdf }}{\fldrslt{https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/sitecollectiondocuments/water/2013-national-water-planning-report-card.pdf\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs24\par
\ulnone\b0\par
\par
\b NWI Policy Guidelines for Water Planning and Management Risk Assessment Module\par
{\cf0\b0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/sitecollectiondocuments/water/risk-module.pdf }}{\fldrslt{https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/sitecollectiondocuments/water/risk-module.pdf\ul0\cf0}}}}\b0\f0\fs24\par
\par
\b Town and city water security definition and diagnostic\par
Public report prepared for the Department of Agriculture, Water and Environment\par
{\ul\b0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/town-city-water-security-definition-diagnostic.pdf"}}{\fldrslt{https://w}}}}{\ul\b0\f0\fs24{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/town-city-water-security-definition-diagnostic.pdf"}}{\fldrslt{ww.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/town-city-water-security-definition-diagnostic.pdf}}}}\ulnone\b\f0\fs24\par
\par
Town and city water security definition and diagnostic Public report prepared for the Department of Agriculture, Water and Environment (February 2021)\par
{\cf0\b0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/town-city-water-security-definition-diagnostic.pdf }}{\fldrslt{https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/town-city-water-security-definition-diagnostic.pdf\ul0\cf0}}}}\b0\f0\fs24\par
\par
\par
\par

\pard\sa40\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520\highlight0\b\f4\fs32 Matt links:\par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520\b0\fs26 NB on GIS mentioned by Irene {\cf0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.esri.com/en-us/what-is-gis/overview }}{\fldrslt{https://www.esri.com/en-us/what-is-gis/overview\ul0\cf0}}}}\f4\fs26\par
NB on GIS mentioned by Irene {\cf6\ul{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.esri.com/en-us/what-is-gis/overview"}}{\fldrslt{https://www.esri.com/en-us/}}}}{\cf6\ul\f4\fs26{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.esri.com/en-us/what-is-gis/overview"}}{\fldrslt{what-is-gis/overview}}}}\cf1\ulnone\f4\fs26\par
\par
\b Mark\par
\b0 Radiation\par
{\cf6\ul{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.apple.com/au/shop/product/HM9X2ZM/B/eve-aqua-smart-water-controller?fnode=b66d0391f620785ed1c5d2d833a81ef575b8439856ae90ed7e5fef1055e9f496f36e59f772cac79c3366a6230f4a8c90b653f9bcdd98bd0893a63de228982bd1c1d758d1d197601bf7864bab26c46133676bc15f5e7d4a5fc9a4dad427b2604fb05773c18e0bea6d79bf09ffb8093040"}}{\fldrslt{https://www.apple.com/au/shop/product/HM9X2ZM/B/eve-aqua-smart-water-controller?fnode=b66d0391f620785ed1c5d2d833a81ef575b8439856ae90ed7e5fef1055e9f496f36e59f772cac79c3366a6230f4a8c90b653f9b}}}}{\cf6\ul\f4\fs26{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.apple.com/au/shop/product/HM9X2ZM/B/eve-aqua-smart-water-controller?fnode=b66d0391f620785ed1c5d2d833a81ef575b8439856ae90ed7e5fef1055e9f496f36e59f772cac79c3366a6230f4a8c90b653f9bcdd98bd0893a63de228982bd1c1d758d1d197601bf7864bab26c46133676bc15f5e7d4a5fc9a4dad427b2604fb05773c18e0bea6d79bf09ffb8093040"}}{\fldrslt{cdd98bd0893a63de228982bd1c1d758d1d197601bf7864bab26c46133676bc15f5e7d4a5fc9a4dad427b2604fb05773c18e0bea6d79bf09ffb8093040}}}}\cf1\ulnone\f4\fs26\par
\par
{\cf0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://apps.apple.com/us/app/openradiation/id1246249831 }}{\fldrslt{https://apps.apple.com/us/app/openradiation/id1246249831\ul0\cf0}}}}\f4\fs26\par
\par
\par

\pard\sa40\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520\b\fs32 RESOURCES\par
Datasets and Background\par

\pard{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf8\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-809\li809\sl240\slmult1\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520 {\cf6\ul\b0\fs26{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.industry.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/401895/meri-annual-evaluation-2020.pdf"}}{\fldrslt{Lower Hunter Drought Monitoring, Evaluation, Reporting and Improvement Report}}}}\cf6\b0\f4\fs26\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}{\ul{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.hunterwater.com.au/our-water/water-supply/water-in-the-lower-hunter/lower-hunter-water-security-plan"}}{\fldrslt{Lower Hunter Water Security Plan}}}}\f4\fs26\par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520\cf1\par
\par

\pard\sa40\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520\b\fs32 RESEARCH:\par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520\b0\fs26\par

\pard\sa40\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520\b\fs32 Hunter. Water\rquote s \ldblquote Love Water\rdblquote  Campaign.\par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520 {\cf0\b0\fs26{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.hunterwater.com.au/home-and-business/information-for-homes/how-to-love-water }}{\fldrslt{https://www.hunterwater.com.au/home-and-business/information-for-homes/how-to-love-water\ul0\cf0}}}}\b0\f4\fs26\par
{\cf0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.hunterwater.com.au/community/community-funding/love-water-grants }}{\fldrslt{https://www.hunterwater.com.au/community/community-funding/love-water-grants\ul0\cf0}}}}\f4\fs26\par
The Love Water campaign is Hunter Water\rquote s core advertising program focussed on water conservation behaviour.(i.e. recent drought.. shower timer delivery ; specifically designed water restriction and water-efficiency information \'85)\par
\par

\pard\sa40\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520\highlight7\b\fs32 Lower Hunter Drought Monitoring, Evaluation,  Reporting and Improvement Report \par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520 {\cf0\b0\fs26{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.industry.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/401895/meri-annual-evaluation-2020.pdf }}{\fldrslt{https://www.industry.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/401895/meri-annual-evaluation-2020.pdf\ul0\cf0}}}}\b0\f4\fs26\par
Published by NSW Departme\highlight0 nt of Planning, Industry and Environment \par
dpie.nsw.gov.au \par
Title: Lower Hunter Drought Monitoring, Evaluation, Reporting and Improvement Report Subtitle: 2019\f5\endash\f4 20 Drought\line\par

\pard{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf8\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-607\li607\sl240\slmult1\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520 1) pp. 13 WATER RESTRICTIONS /\'85PROVING SOCIAL AWARENESS EFFECTIVENESS\'85\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}\highlight7 Data indicates that water consumption was reduced by around 13.6% during Level 1 restrictions (compared with 4% to 6% as estimated in the LHWP) and by around 21% during the short period of Level 2 restrictions (compared with 7% to 9% as estimated in the LHWP). Overall, the reduction was 14.3% for the period covering both Level 1 and 2 restrictions. A 3% reduction had already been observed over the 12 months leading into restrictions. This was during a period where customers were exposed to water saving messages as part of the Love Water campaign pp.13 \par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}Water restrictions should continue to form a part of the drought response in the Lower Hunter. Future changes to the restrictions program should be guided by NSW Government\rquote s investigations into options for a more consistent approach to water restrictions across NSW. It is noted that water savings in future droughts may be more difficult to achieve due to the possible impact of \lquote demand hardening\rquote  ( TEH REDUCTION IN THE ABILITY OF A CUSTOMER TO ARCHIEVE further water reduction after easier and more cost-effective water reductions have been implemented).\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}\highlight0 See also p.16 for more info\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}IMPORTANT: Overall community feedback was that conservation of water should be encouraged early in times of drought to slow down the usage rate. They also felt water restrictions and education were important as drought continues to avoid running out of water. The positive aspects raised by participants were that water restrictions (see more pp.16-17)\par

\pard{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf8\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-809\li809\sl240\slmult1\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520 promote the value of water \par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}involve the community in a positive way \par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}can be implemented immediately \par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}are low cost compared to supply augmentation \par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}can save customers money on water usage. \par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}The main negatives associated with water restrictions were that they were seen to: \par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}rely on the action of the community \par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}be difficult to monitor and enforce \par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}be complicated to describe. \par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}[\'85] Participants noted that public communications campaigns are important to increase awareness of restrictions and the need for compliance. \par

\pard{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf8\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-607\li607\sl240\slmult1\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520 pp. 20 WATER EFFICIENCY AND LOSS MINIMISATION (pp. 20)\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}Love Water. In the recent drought this included a focus on business water efficiency programs aimed at identifying and repairing leaks as well as expanded education programs to encourage smart water choices such as shorter showers. \par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}Economic Level of Water Conservation (ELWC) methodology will improve the evaluation of water efficiency initiatives and will guide utilities in their investments. \par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}Water conservation played a key part of Hunter Water\rquote s response to the recent drought and included a range of community initiatives as well as a program of works to reduce losses from the network. \par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}HUNTER WATER ONGOING INITIATIVES:\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}SEE: Non-residential water efficiency programs  Water efficiency management plans and large non-residential customer engagement (pp.21, 11 industries/saving 360 ML in 2019-20. \par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}Find & Fix initiative. Hunter Water deployed a fleet of 45 temporary data loggers during the year to help identify leaks at its sites and on customer assets including hospitals, schools, council and commercial sites /Water savings of around 670 ML /was the most effective water conservation initiative rolled out during the drought period/ The cost of this activity was $315,000 (Pp.21-22)\par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520\b\tab - IMPORTANT: Residential water efficiency programs \par

\pard 
{\pntext\f4 1.\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pnf4\pnindent360\pnstart1\pndec{\pntxta.}}
\fi-560\li560\sl240\slmult1\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520\b0 Leak notifications and repair rebates \par
{\pntext\f4 2.\tab}High-usage residential customers: water assessment and audits\'85\par

\pard 
{\pntext\f4 2.\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pnf4\pnindent360\pnstart2\pndec{\pntxta.}}
\fi-607\li607\sl240\slmult1\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520 Targeted customer engagement \par

\pard 
{\pntext\f4 1.\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pnf4\pnindent360\pnstart1\pndec{\pntxta.}}
\fi-560\li560\sl240\slmult1\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520 Local councils (reduced irrigation of sporting fields and parks I& identification of other opportunities to reduce water use across their operations)\par
{\pntext\f4 2.\tab}Schools and TAFE ( information regarding water restrictions and water efficiency opportunities)\par
{\pntext\f4 3.\tab}Bulk housing providers (Defence Housing Australia (DHA) and the NSW Department of Communities and Justice \f5\endash\f4\lang1033  Housing Services )\par
{\pntext\f4 4.\tab}\f6\lang17 Standpipe customers \par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520\par

\pard{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf8\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-809\li809\sl240\slmult1\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520 LEARNING AND NEXT STEPS \line IMPORTANT: The non-residential sector offered the best opportunity to achieve ongoing water savings through water conservation programs. Investment by Hunter Water to install data loggers and make onsite repairs provided significant savings in the last drought.  [\'81\'63] Ongoing demand forecasting will need to consider how a commitment to water conservation during non-drought periods may impact upon the capacity to gain additional savings during drought. \par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}SEE \rdblquote RECYCLED WATER\rdblquote  pp. 43 / where is being applied\'81\'63\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}FUTURE PLANNING & RECOMMENDATION (pp.50-51)\par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520   - Community response to restrictions played an important role in \tab reducing demand and slowing storage depletion throughout the \tab\tab drought. This was accompanied by ramping up of Hunter Water \tab\tab initiatives to reduce network losses and to support non-residential \tab customers to identify and reduce leakage and implement \tab\tab\tab efficiencies. [\'81\'63]\par

\pard{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf8\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-607\li607\sl240\slmult1\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520 The upcoming LHWSP will set out a program of supply and demand actions that will ensure the region has a has a resilient and sustainable water future for the next 40 years and is able to respond to drought. \par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}\'81\'63by continuing to invest in water conservation, increasing the capacity of water supply system and planning now for infrastructure that may be needed in the next drought\'81\'63\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}SEE TABLE 50-51 RECOMMNEDATION\par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520\par
\par

\pard\sa40\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520\b\fs32 WATERWISE GUIDELINES (SYDNEY WATER)\par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520 {\cf0\b0\fs26{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.sydneywater.com.au/sw/water-the-environment/what-we-re-doing/water-restrictions/index.htm }}{\fldrslt{https://www.sydneywater.com.au/sw/water-the-environment/what-we-re-doing/water-restrictions/index.htm\ul0\cf0}}}}\b0\f4\fs26\par
\par
\par
OTHER LINKS:\par
There\rquote s an App for That: 3 Mobile Apps for Water Conservation: {\cf6\ul{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.luminultra.com/blog/theres-an-app-for-that-3-mobile-apps-for-water-conservation/"}}{\fldrslt{https://www.luminultra.com/blog/theres-an-app-for-that-3-mobile-apps-for-water-co}}}}{\cf6\ul\f4\fs26{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.luminultra.com/blog/theres-an-app-for-that-3-mobile-apps-for-water-conservation/"}}{\fldrslt{nservation/}}}}\cf1\ulnone\f4\fs26\par

\pard{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf8\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-607\li607\sl240\slmult1\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520 Home Water Works: {\cf6\ul{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://home-water-works.org/"}}{\fldrslt{https://home-water-works.org}}}}\cf6\f4\fs26\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}\cf1 World Water Council: {\cf0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.worldwatercouncil.org/en/global-changes }}{\fldrslt{https://www.worldwatercouncil.org/en/global-changes\ul0\cf0}}}}\cf6\f4\fs26\par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\qj\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520\cf1\b\tab Integrated water resource management\b0\par
\tab The Council encourages the development of innovative policies \tab\tab that support integrated water resources management.\par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520\tab The World Water Council is currently considering a systemic \tab\tab approach that takes into account the links between food, energy, \tab health, education, water quality and the circular economy, in \tab\tab particular the reuse of wastewater.\par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\qj\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520\b\tab Strategic actions\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf8\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-809\li809\sl240\slmult1\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520 Change concepts and implementation of water management\~\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}Promote the implementation of sound and sustainable water management policies\~\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}Draw attention to the need to manage water resources as an integral part of social and economic development\~\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}publications: {\cf0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://iwaponline.com/wp/issue }}{\fldrslt{https://iwaponline.com/wp/issue\ul0\cf0}}}}\cf6\f4\fs26\par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520\cf1\par
HUNTER WATER \par
VIDEO Planning our water future: {\cf0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://yourvoice.hunterwater.com.au/water-future }}{\fldrslt{https://yourvoice.hunterwater.com.au/water-future\ul0\cf0}}}}\f4\fs26\par
\par

\pard\sa40\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520\b\fs32 HOW MUCH WATER DO YOU USE:\par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520 {\cf0\b0\fs26{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://home-water-works.org/calculator }}{\fldrslt{https://home-water-works.org/calculator\ul0\cf0}}}}\b0\f4\fs26\par
SEE table of water comsumption: {\cf0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://home-water-works.org/about/calculator }}{\fldrslt{https://home-water-works.org/about/calculator\ul0\cf0}}}}\f4\fs26\par
\par
\par

\pard\sa40\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520\b\fs32 WORLD WATER COUNCIL (VERY IMPORTANT/ SEE LINK ARTICLE)/ Global changes\par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520 {\cf0\b0\fs26{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.worldwatercouncil.org/en/global-changes }}{\fldrslt{https://www.worldwatercouncil.org/en/global-changes\ul0\cf0}}}}\b0\f4\fs26\par
\b\par

\pard{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf8\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-607\li607\sl240\slmult1\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520 RAISING \b0  \b AMBITIONS ON \b0  \b THE ROAD \b0  \b TO COP25 :\par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520 {\cf0\b0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.worldwatercouncil.org/sites/default/files/Initiatives/Global_changes/WWC_Bonn_Workshop_WEB_0.pdf }}{\fldrslt{https://www.worldwatercouncil.org/sites/default/files/Initiatives/Global_changes/WWC_Bonn_Workshop_WEB_0.pdf\ul0\cf0}}}}\b0\f4\fs26\par
\par

\pard{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf8\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-607\li607\sl240\slmult1\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520 THE OPPORTUNITY TO SCALE UP FUNDING AND FINANCING {\cf6\ul{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.worldwatercouncil.org/sites/default/files/Initiatives/Global_changes/WWC-Investing-in-Water-Infrastructure-for-Climate-Adaption_WEB.pdf"}}{\fldrslt{https://www.worldwatercouncil.org/sites/default/files/Initiatives/Global_changes/WWC-Investing-i}}}}{\cf6\ul\f4\fs26{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.worldwatercouncil.org/sites/default/files/Initiatives/Global_changes/WWC-Investing-in-Water-Infrastructure-for-Climate-Adaption_WEB.pdf"}}{\fldrslt{n-Water-Infrastructure-for-Climate-Adaption_WEB.pdf}}}}\cf1\ulnone\f4\fs26\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}CLIMATE IS WATER\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}{\cf0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.worldwatercouncil.org/sites/default/files/Initiatives/Global_changes/WWC_CIW_COP25.pdf }}{\fldrslt{https://www.worldwatercouncil.org/sites/default/files/Initiatives/Global_changes/WWC_CIW_COP25.pdf\ul0\cf0}}}}\f4\fs26\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}{\cf0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.worldwatercouncil.org/sites/default/files/Initiatives/Global_changes/CIW_Flyer2019_Negotiators.pdf }}{\fldrslt{https://www.worldwatercouncil.org/sites/default/files/Initiatives/Global_changes/CIW_Flyer2019_Negotiators.pdf\ul0\cf0}}}}\cf6\f4\fs26\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}\cf1\b URBAN RESILIENCE AND WATER DISASTERS:\line A FUTURE ROLE FOR THE WORLD WATER COUNCIL \par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}{\cf6\ul\b0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.worldwatercouncil.org/sites/default/files/Initiatives/Global_changes/Urban_Resilience_and_Water_Disasters_A_Future_Role_for_the_World_Water_Council.pdf"}}{\fldrslt{https://www.worldwatercouncil.org/sit}}}}{\cf6\ul\b0\f4\fs26{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.worldwatercouncil.org/sites/default/files/Initiatives/Global_changes/Urban_Resilience_and_Water_Disasters_A_Future_Role_for_the_World_Water_Council.pdf"}}{\fldrslt{es/default/files/Initiatives/Global_changes/Urban_Resilience_and_Water_Disasters_A_Future_Role_for_the_World_Water_Council.pdf}}}}\cf1\ulnone\b\f4\fs26\par
{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}INCREASING FINANTIAL FLOWS FOR URBAN SANITATION:\par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520 {\cf0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.worldwatercouncil.org/sites/default/files/Initiatives/Global_changes/PolicyBrief_Increasing_Financial_Flows_for_Urban_Sanitation_EN_0.pdf }}{\fldrslt{https://www.worldwatercouncil.org/sites/default/files/Initiatives/Global_changes/PolicyBrief_Increasing_Financial_Flows_for_Urban_Sanitation_EN_0.pdf\ul0\cf0}}}}\f4\fs26\par
\par
\par

\pard\sa40\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520\fs32 WORLD WATER COUNCIL / Integrated water resource management\par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520\fs26 Integrated water resource management\par
{\cf0\b0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.worldwatercouncil.org/en/integrated-water-resource-management-0 }}{\fldrslt{https://www.worldwatercouncil.org/en/integrated-water-resource-management-0\ul0\cf0}}}}\b0\f4\fs26\par
Related papers:\par

\pard{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf8\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-607\li607\sl240\slmult1\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520 INTEGRATED WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT. The new way forwards\par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520 {\cf0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.worldwatercouncil.org/sites/default/files/Initiatives/IWRM/Integrated_Water_Resource_Management-A_new_way_forward%20.pdf }}{\fldrslt{https://www.worldwatercouncil.org/sites/default/files/Initiatives/IWRM/Integrated_Water_Resource_Management-A_new_way_forward%20.pdf\ul0\cf0}}}}\f4\fs26\par

\pard{\pntext\f8\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf8\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-607\li607\sl240\slmult1\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520 {\cf0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.worldwatercouncil.org/sites/default/files/Initiatives/IWRM/Revitalising_IWRM_for_the_2030_Agenda-Challenge_Paper.pdf }}{\fldrslt{https://www.worldwatercouncil.org/sites/default/files/Initiatives/IWRM/Revitalising_IWRM_for_the_2030_Agenda-Challenge_Paper.pdf\ul0\cf0}}}}\f4\fs26\par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520 {\cf6\ul{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.worldwatercouncil.org/sites/default/files/Initiatives/IWRM/Revitalising_IWRM_for_the_2030_Agenda-Challenge_Paper.pdf"}}{\fldrslt{https://www.worldwatercouncil.org/sites/default/files/Initiatives/IWRM/Revitalising_IWRM_for_the_2030_Agenda-}}}}{\cf6\ul\f4\fs26{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.worldwatercouncil.org/sites/default/files/Initiatives/IWRM/Revitalising_IWRM_for_the_2030_Agenda-Challenge_Paper.pdf"}}{\fldrslt{Challenge_Paper.pdf}}}}\cf1\ulnone\f4\fs26\par
\par
\par

\pard\sa40\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520\b\fs32 Alliance for water efficiency\par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520\fs26 Home water works\par
{\cf0\b0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://home-water-works.org/water-conservation-tips/home }}{\fldrslt{https://home-water-works.org/water-conservation-tips/home\ul0\cf0}}}}\b0\f4\fs26\par
\b Resource Library\par
{\cf0\b0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.allianceforwaterefficiency.org/resources }}{\fldrslt{https://www.allianceforwaterefficiency.org/resources\ul0\cf0}}}}\b0\f4\fs26\par
\tab - See \ldblquote Communication and Education\rdblquote  \par
\tab {\cf0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.allianceforwaterefficiency.org/resources/outreach }}{\fldrslt{https://www.allianceforwaterefficiency.org/resources/outreach\ul0\cf0}}}}\f4\fs26\par
\tab       - \b Massachusetts Water Conservation Toolkit\b0 : {\cf0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.mass.gov/conservemawater }}{\fldrslt{https://www.mass.gov/conservemawater\ul0\cf0}}}}\b\f4\fs26\par

\pard\sa40\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520\fs32\par
Zero Carbon world\par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520 {\cf0\b0\fs26{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.centreforideas.com/article/zero-carbon-world }}{\fldrslt{https://www.centreforideas.com/article/zero-carbon-world\ul0\cf0}}}}\b0\f4\fs26\par
\par
\par

\pard\sa40\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520\b\fs32 IDEAS:\par

\pard 
{\pntext\f4 1.\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pnf4\pnindent360\pnstart1\pndec{\pntxta.}}
\fi-560\li560\sl240\slmult1\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520\b0\fs26 Sustainability & Education\par
{\pntext\f4 2.\tab}What if \ldblquote good practice\rdblquote  in water  reduction, reuse and recycle (electricity and waste also -i.e. no plastic culture) got taxes incentives and/or other measures to encourage people into a more sustainable culture\par
{\pntext\f4 3.\tab}What is the app (or whatever else) is focus on Schools (it is said kids educates parents in terms of sustainability, instead of the oposite\'85)\par
{\pntext\f4 4.\tab}Irrigation is an important \ldblquote leaking\rdblquote  issue: implementing drip irrigation in gardens and public spaces is a must\'85\par
{\pntext\f4 5.\tab}If following the idea of an APP, I would incorporate criteria such as: use of rainwater for flush and gardening, car cleaning\'85/ use of irrigation \rquote smart water systems\rquote  / reuse of shower and sink water for flush\'85/cover swimming pools to avoid evaporation\'85  as a future improvements that will show users/citizens how this improvement will reduce their bill while helping the environment and water systems (I.e incentives) \par
{\pntext\f4 6.\tab}In hunter water \ldblquote Planning our water future\rdblquote  talk about recycling water in a very inefficient manner (I.e. water plant and then pipe system back to industry and park/golf irrigation\'85. While storing the rain-water  locally (parks..) will save lots more\'85\par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\tx7280\tx7840\tx8400\tx8960\tx9520\fs24\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\f7\fs22\par
}
 